Revamped the routing documentation (#12114)
symfony/symfony-docs: routing.rst

Routing
=======

> When your application receives a request, it executes a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When your application receives an HTTP request, it executes a
```

I find "request" a bit to vague. Routing is specifically for the HTTP protocol

Author: Ryan suggested the opposite 😆 

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/73419/62790187-db7be200-baca-11e9-9a59-30245721fc48.png)

> When your application receives an HTTP request, it executes some

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When your application receives an HTTP request, it executes a
```

> :doc:`controller action </controller>` to generate the HTTP response. The

Reviewer 2: Could we remove HTTP in both places? It makes the article sound more technical... not sure it's needed.

routing configuration defines which action to run for each incoming URL. It also

> provides other useful features, such as generating SEO-friendly URLs

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
provides other useful features, like generating SEO-friendly URLs
```

(e.g. ``/read/intro-to-symfony`` instead of ``index.php?article_id=57``).

Creating Routes
---------------

Routes can be configured in YAML, XML, PHP or using annotations. All formats

> provide the same features and performance, so choose the one you prefer.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
provide the same features and performance, so choose your favorite.
```

> :doc:`Symfony recommends to use annotations </best_practices/controllers>`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
:doc:`Symfony recommends annotations </best_practices/controllers>`
```

> because it's convenient to put the route definition and its controller in the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
because it's convenient to put the route and controller in the
```

> same place instead of having to deal with multiple files.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
same place instead of dealing with multiple files.
```

> If you choose PHP annotations, run this command once in your application to add

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you choose annotations, run this command once in your application to add
```

        use Symfony\Component\Routing\Loader\Configurator\RoutingConfigurator;

        return function (RoutingConfigurator $routes) {
            $routes->add('blog_list', '/blog')
                // the controller value has the format [controller_class, method_name]
                ->controller([BlogController::class, 'list'])

                // if the action is implemented as the __invoke() method of the
                // controller class, you can skip the ', method_name]' part:
                // ->controller([BlogController::class])
            ;
        };

This configuration defines a route called ``blog_list`` that matches when the
user requests the ``/blog`` URL. When the match occurs, the application runs
the ``list()`` method of the ``BlogController`` class.

.. note::

    The query string of a URL is not considered when matching routes. In this
    example, URLs like ``/blog?foo=bar`` and ``/blog?foo=bar&bar=foo`` will
    also match the ``blog_list`` route.

> The route name is not important for now, but it will be essential later when

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The route name (``blog_list``) is not important for now, but it will be essential later when
```

:ref:`generating URLs <routing-generating-urls>`. You only have to keep in mind

> that names can be chosen freely but they must be unique in the application.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
that each route name must be unique in the application.
```

Route HTTP Methods
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> By default, routes respond to any HTTP verb (``GET``, ``POST``, ``PUT``, etc.)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
By default, routes match any HTTP verb (``GET``, ``POST``, ``PUT``, etc.)
```

            xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"
            xsi:schemaLocation="http://symfony.com/schema/routing
                https://symfony.com/schema/routing/routing-1.0.xsd">

            <route id="api_post_show" path="/api/posts/{id}"
                controller="App\Controller\BlogApiController::show"
                methods="GET|HEAD"/>

            <route id="api_post_edit" path="/api/posts/{id}"
                controller="App\Controller\BlogApiController::edit"
                methods="PUT"/>
        </routes>

    .. code-block:: php

        // config/routes.php
        use App\Controller\BlogApiController;
        use Symfony\Component\Routing\Loader\Configurator\RoutingConfigurator;

        return function (RoutingConfigurator $routes) {
            $routes->add('api_post_show', '/api/posts/{id}')
                ->controller([BlogApiController::class, 'show'])
                ->methods(['GET', 'HEAD'])
            ;
            $routes->add('api_post_edit', '/api/posts/{id}')
                ->controller([BlogApiController::class, 'edit'])
                ->methods(['PUT'])
            ;
        };

.. tip::

>     HTML forms only support ``GET`` and ``POST`` methods. If you are calling a

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    HTML forms only support ``GET`` and ``POST`` methods. If you're calling a
```

I'm assuming `you're` is equally understandable to non-native speakers than `you are`. Using `you are` sounds a lot more formal in English - so I'm preferring the more casual tone.

    route with a different method from an HTML form, add a hidden field called
    ``_method`` with the method to use (e.g. ``<input type="hidden" name="_method" value="PUT" />``).

>     If you use :doc:`Symfony forms </forms>` this is done automatically for you.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    The :doc:`forms component </forms>` does this automatically for you.
```

Author: This is the only change where I disagree a bit. I think it's easier to understand if we say _"HTML forms don't do this but Symfony forms do"_. In my opinion, *"the forms component"* sounds more abstract than *"Symfony forms"*.

.. _i18n-routing:

Localized Routes (i18n)

> ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Reviewer 2: This feels too soon for me. I'm looking at the in-page navigation. With this PR, it is:

```
* Creating Routes
  * Route HTTP Methods
  * Localized Routes (I18n)
  * Route Groups
* Debugging Routes
* Route Parameters
  * Parameters Validation
  * Optional Parameters
  * Expression Parameters
  * Parameter Conversion
  * Special Parameters
  * Extra Parameters
  * Slack Character in Route Parameters
* Getting Route Information
* Special Routes
  * Rendering templates
  * Redirecting to URLs and Routes
* Sub-Domain Routing
  * Testing Sub-Domain Routing
* Generating URLs
 * Generating URLs in Controllers
 * Generating URLs in ...
 * ... about 5 more of these - very nice actually
* Troubleshooting
```

Here's my proposed change: https://gist.github.com/weaverryan/372a095b9f0fabb8e27ae3308795cff5/revisions#diff-29f95331297a1d1a378b587c9181f9ea - and some explanations:

* Localized routes moves down (and because it already has no sub-sections, it is just a single-level item)
* Remove `Testing Sub-Domain Routing` header so it doesn't show up as a sub-nav item. The really shouldn't live here either...
* Put `Debugging Routes` under `Creating Routes`
* A few title renames...

Reviewer 2: And... one additional suggestion: move "Route Groups & Prefixes" below "Route Parameters" and make it a top-level h2 (with no sub-levels). The reason is that this section (like the localized section) shows *tons* of examples with route parameters... even though we haven't talked about those yet. The "Debugging Routes" section also shows wildcards, but I think that's ok.

Author: All these changes make things much better. Done! Thank you.

                controller="App\Controller\BlogApiController::show"
                methods="GET|HEAD"/>

            <route id="api_post_edit" path="/api/posts/{id}"
                controller="App\Controller\BlogApiController::edit"
                methods="PUT"/>
        </routes>

    .. code-block:: php

        // config/routes.php
        use App\Controller\BlogApiController;
        use Symfony\Component\Routing\Loader\Configurator\RoutingConfigurator;

        return function (RoutingConfigurator $routes) {
            $routes->add('api_post_show', '/api/posts/{id}')
                ->controller([BlogApiController::class, 'show'])
                ->methods(['GET', 'HEAD'])
            ;
            $routes->add('api_post_edit', '/api/posts/{id}')
                ->controller([BlogApiController::class, 'edit'])
                ->methods(['PUT'])
            ;
        };

.. tip::

    HTML forms only support ``GET`` and ``POST`` methods. If you're calling a
    route with a different method from an HTML form, add a hidden field called
    ``_method`` with the method to use (e.g. ``<input type="hidden" name="_method" value="PUT" />``).

>     If you use :doc:`Symfony forms </forms>` this is done automatically for you.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    If you use :doc:`Symfony Forms </forms>` this is done automatically for you.
```

very minor, but I think we always capitialize package names

Author: Ryan also complained ... I'm going to reword this.

As your application grows, you'll eventually have a *lot* of routes. Symfony
includes some commands to help you debug routing issues. First, the ``debug:router``
command lists all your application routes in the same order in which Symfony
evaluates them:

.. code-block:: terminal

    $ php bin/console debug:router

    ----------------  -------  -------  -----  --------------------------------------------
    Name              Method   Scheme   Host   Path
    ----------------  -------  -------  -----  --------------------------------------------
    homepage          ANY      ANY      ANY    /
    contact           GET      ANY      ANY    /contact
    contact_process   POST     ANY      ANY    /contact
    article_show      ANY      ANY      ANY    /articles/{_locale}/{year}/{title}.{_format}
    blog              ANY      ANY      ANY    /blog/{page}
    blog_show         ANY      ANY      ANY    /blog/{slug}
    ----------------  -------  -------  -----  --------------------------------------------

Pass the name (or part of the name) of some route to this argument to print the
route details:

.. code-block:: terminal

    $ php bin/console debug:router app_lucky_number

>       +-------------+---------------------------------------------------------+

Reviewer: Seems like this is indented 2 spaces too much (see inconsistency with previous terminal output block).
Same in the block below

            ;
        };

.. _routing-route-groups:

Route Groups
~~~~~~~~~~~~

> It's common for routes to share some features and options (e.g. all routes

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It's common for a group of routes to share some options (e.g. all routes
```

related to the blog start with ``/blog``; all routes validate the locale with

> the same regular expression; etc.) That's why Symfony includes a feature to

Reviewer 2: I'd remove the 2nd example - we're going to show it below

> share the routes configuration.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
share route configuration.
```

> When defining routes as annotations, add a ``@Route`` annotation to the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When defining routes as annotations, add an ``@Route`` annotation to the
```

> controller class to apply some options to all the routes defined in that class::

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
controller class to apply options to all the routes defined in that class::
```

    use Symfony\Component\Routing\Annotation\Route;

    /**
     * @Route("/blog", requirements={"locale": "en|es|fr"}, name="blog_")
     */
    class BlogController
    {
        /**
         * @Route("/{_locale}", name="index")
         */
        public function index()
        {
            // ...
        }

        /**
         * @Route("/{_locale}/posts/{slug}", name="post")
         */
        public function show(Post $post)
        {
            // ...
        }
    }

In this example, the route of the ``index()`` action will be called ``blog_index``
and its URL will be ``/blog/``. The route of the ``show()`` action will be called
``blog_post`` and its URL will be ``/blog/{_locale}/posts/{slug}``. Both routes
will also validate that the ``_locale`` parameter matches the regular expression

> defined in the class annotation.

Reviewer 2: We could put part/most of this explanation as comments in the code above:

```php
/**
 * @Route("/{_locale}/posts/{slug}", name="post")
 *
 * creates a "/blog/{_locale}/posts/{slug}" route named "blog_post"
 */
```

Author: I'm not fan of this because annotations and "normal comments" in the same PHPdoc always look a bit confusing, even for Symfony experts. But I've changed this example a bit to merge annotations and other formats.

                <name-prefix>blog_</name-prefix>
                <!-- these requirements are added to all imported routes -->
                <requirement key="locale">en|es|fr</requirement>
            </import>
        </routes>

    .. code-block:: php

        // config/routes/annotations.php
        use Symfony\Component\Routing\Loader\Configurator\RoutingConfigurator;

        return function (RoutingConfigurator $routes) {
            $routes->import('../src/Controller/', 'annotation')
                // this is added to the beginning of all imported route URLs
                ->prefix('/blog')
                // this is added to the beginning of all imported route names
                ->namePrefix('blog_')
                // these requirements are added to all imported routes
                ->requirements(['locale' => 'en|es|fr'])
            ;
        };

.. note::

    If any of the prefixed routes defines an empty path, Symfony adds a trailing
    slash to it. In the previous example, an empty path prefixed with ``/site``
    will result in the ``/site/`` URL. If you want to avoid this behavior, set

>     the ``trailing_slash_on_root`` option to ``false``:

Reviewer 2: Does this also apply to annotations?

Could we include this in the code-block above, commented out with the explanation:

```
# An empty route path ("") will become "/blog/".
# Uncomment this option to make that URL "/blog" instead
# trailing_slash_on_root: false
```

Author: It doesn't apply to annotations ... but I love your suggestion to inline this as comments. I love it!

            /**

>              * @Route("/blog/{page<\d+>?1}", name="blog_list")

Reviewer: Unless I'm missing something, we never documented the `<\d+>` part of this syntax (and there is an inconsistency between the different code blocks in this configuration-block, the XML format has a space between route name and regex.

I'm not sure, but I think I would prefer to document only one of the two versions in the "main text" either the complete inline or the `requirements`/`defaults` block. We can then quickly tell about the other format in a small tip block (e.g. "If your requirements/defaults become too complex, you can also use the more verbose syntax and separate requirements/defaults from the match string:")

Author: Yes, it's explained in the doc. IT's a bit long, so it's hard to explain everything ... but we show the expanded format always, then we show the inlined format one time and we warn users: if regexps are complex, the inline format is not very readable.

    To give a ``null`` default value to any placeholder, add nothing after the
    ``?`` character (e.g. ``/blog/{page?}``).

.. _routing-expression_parameters:

> Expression Parameters

Reviewer: I would not call these parameters, they are completely separated from the parameter matching and more a sub-matcher. Maybe "Matching using Expressions" or "Expression Matching"?

Author: This is actually a very good catch. Conditions are completely unrelated to parameters. Let me think about where to put this new section. Thanks!

                <!-- <condition>request.headers.get('User-Agent') matches '%app.allowed_browsers%'</condition> -->
            </route>
        </routes>

    .. code-block:: php

        // config/routes.php
        use App\Controller\DefaultController;
        use Symfony\Component\Routing\Loader\Configurator\RoutingConfigurator;

        return function (RoutingConfigurator $routes) {
            $routes->add('contact', '')
                ->controller([DefaultController::class, 'contact'])
                ->condition('context.getMethod() in ["GET", "HEAD"] and request.headers.get("User-Agent") matches "/firefox/i"')
                // expressions can also include config parameters:
                // 'request.headers.get("User-Agent") matches "%app.allowed_browsers%"'
            ;
        };

The value of the ``condition`` option is any valid
:doc:`ExpressionLanguage expression </components/expression_language/syntax>`
where you can use any of these variables created by Symfony:

``context``
    An instance of :class:`Symfony\\Component\\Routing\\RequestContext`,
    which holds the most fundamental information about the route being matched.

> ``request``

Reviewer: I think we always have a blank line between definitions in a definition list

            ;
        };

.. versionadded:: 4.3

    The special attributes were introduced in Symfony 4.3.

> Extra Parameters

Reviewer: I know this is probably more the dev-me than the doc-me, but these are actually no longer parameters, but route attributes. Is it maybe important to differentiate between them?

Author: Originally we had a section called "route attributes" ... but we removed it, because we now explain "request attributes" (in this section -> `Getting the Route Name and Parameters`).

I wouldn't introduce more terms because everything is already packed with terms.

        use App\Controller\DefaultController;
        use Symfony\Component\Routing\Loader\Configurator\RoutingConfigurator;

        return function (RoutingConfigurator $routes) {
            $routes->add('share', '/share/{token}')
                ->controller([DefaultController::class, 'share'])
                ->requirements([
                    'token' => '.+',
                ])
            ;
        };

.. note::

    If the route defines several placeholders and you apply this permissive
    regular expression to all of them, the results won't be the expected. For
    example, if the route definition is ``/share/{path}/{token}`` and both
    ``path`` and ``token`` accept ``/``, then ``path`` will contain its contents
    and the token, and ``token`` will be empty.

.. note::

    If the route includes the special ``{_format}`` parameter, you shouldn't
    use the ``.+`` requirement for the parameters that allow slashes. For example,
    if the pattern is ``/share/{token}.{_format}`` and ``{token}`` allows any
    character, the ``/share/foo/bar.json`` URL will consider ``foo/bar.json``
    as the token and the format will be empty. This can be solved by replacing

>     the ``.+`` requirement by ``[^.]+`` to allow any character except dots.

Reviewer: Won't the lazy regex quantifier (`.+?`) help here? If not, I think it's good to add it explicitly

Author: Not sure. I used the same expression which was in the previous doc. Changing these little things inside a huge refactorization is always scary. So, I prefer to leave this.
